#summary Configuring and using mod_vhost_dbd
#labels Featured

= Introduction =
mod_vhost_dbd has one directive:

==== DBDocRoot    SQL    [ PARAM ... ] ====

mod_vhost_dbd overrides the document root directory for a request to a value returned by an SQL query.

The query returns the override document root directory name as the first column.
{{{
DBDocRoot "SELECT WebDir FROM WebTable WHERE WebName = %s"  HOSTNAME
}}}
DBDocRoot can be used at the Server or the Virtual Host level.


= Details =
*SQL* is an SQL statement which returns no more than one row, with the document root directory as the first column.

*PARAM ...* arguments are inserted into the SQL statement at request time.  Use one *PARAM* for each parameter marker in your SQL statement.  In the examples, *%s* is the parameter marker.  *PARAM* may be any of these words (space separated, not case sensitive):
|| *HOSTNAME*||requested hostname|| _may be NULL if there is no Host header. e.g. HTTP 1.0 or FTP requests_ ||
|| *IP*||server IP address|| _as a string, never NULL_ ||
|| *PORT*||server port number|| _as string, never NULL_ ||
|| *URI*||The request URI|| _never NULL_ ||
|| *URI`n`* _where_ *`n`* _is 1-9_ ||Pass only the first `n` segments of the URI to the query|| _never NULL_ ||

  * You must have an Apache [http://people.apache.org/~niq/dbd.html DBD driver] and [http://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.3/mod/mod_dbd.html mod_dbd] loaded and configured to use mod_vhost_dbd.

  * Use [http://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.3/mod/mod_so.html#loadmodule LoadModule] to enable mod_vhost_dbd.
{{{
LoadModule vhost_dbd_module modules/mod_vhost_dbd.so 
}}}

  * If your query returns no rows, the existing document root is used.  If your query returns more than one row, the request is rejected with a _500 Internal Server Error_.

  * Do not put a semicolon at the end of your SQL statement.

  * *PARAM* names can be repeated as necessary. For example: to only look up hosts containing ".acme." for port 80 requests:
{{{
        DBDocRoot "SELECT DocRoot FROM myTable WHERE %s LIKE '%%.acme.%%' AND Host = %s AND %s = 80" HOSTNAME HOSTNAME PORT
}}}

  * *DBDocRoot* can use the name of a statement previously defined with the [http://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.3/mod/mod_dbd.html#dbdpreparesql DBDPrepareSQL] directive as the *SQL* parameter. For example:
{{{
DBDPrepareSQL "SELECT WebDir FROM WebTable WHERE WebName = %s"  HostLookup
...
DBDocRoot HostLookup  HOSTNAME
}}}

 * Some databases (for example: Firebird) may report errors when statements for *DBDocRoot* are prepared with [http://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.3/mod/mod_dbd.html#dbdpreparesql DBDPrepareSQL]. In this case, [http://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.3/mod/mod_dbd.html#dbdpreparesql DBDPrepareSQL] cannot be used for virtual host statements.

  * For Apache 2.2 prior to version 2.2.9, use parameter markers appropriate to your database.  For example: Use *?* for [http://odbc-dbd.googlecode.com/ ODBC] or SQLite.  Use *%s* for MySQL, etc.

  * For Apache 2.2.9+ always use *%s* as a parameter marker in your SQL statement.  If your SQL statement contains other *%* characters (for example, in a LIKE clause), use *%%* to prevent them from being misinterpreted as parameter markers.

  * For Apache 2.2.9+, any additional columns which are returned will set an [http://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.3/env.html environment variable] with the same name as the column name. If the column value is NULL, any existing [http://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.3/env.html environment variable] which matches the column name will be unset.

  * Using a URI *PARAM* increases the number of database queries required because each request requires a new query. Using only the leading portion of the URI can reduce the number of database queries required. When multiple requests are made on the same keep-alive connection which have the same URI`n` value, only one query is performed.

  * If the URI is /alpha/beta/gamma/delta/index.html:
{{{
   URI1 is /alpha
   URI2 is /alpha/beta
   URI3 is /alpha/beta/gamma
   ...
   URI5 is /alpha/beta/gamma/delta/index.html
   URI6 is /alpha/beta/gamma/delta/index.html
   ...
   URI9 is /alpha/beta/gamma/delta/index.html
   URI  is /alpha/beta/gamma/delta/index.html
}}}


  * If [http://httpd.apache.org/modules/ mod_ftp] is used, an additional *PARAM* name is available.  *FTPUSER* can be specified to pass the logged-in FTP user name.  This parameter is not available for HTTP requests.

  * Setting *[http://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.3/mod/core.html#loglevel LogLevel] debug* will print additional information in the Apache error log which can help to diagnose SQL query problems.

  * The httpd server variable: *document_root* is not changed by mod_vhost_dbd.  It remains as the value set by the *[http://httpd.apache.org/docs/current/mod/core.html#documentroot DocumentRoot ]* directive in the httpd configuration file.  For example, these variables will contain the path set in the httpd configuration file - not the path set by *DBDocRoot*:
||PHP || {{{$_SERVER['DOCUMENT_ROOT']}}} ||
||CGI || environment variable: {{{DOCUMENT_ROOT}}} ||
||J2EE || {{{GetServletContext().GetRealPath("/")}}} ||